@Priority: Mid
Time required: 3 hours

## Introduction
Like arrays, a linked list is used to represent sequential data. Linear collection of data elements whose order is not given by their physical placement in memory, unlike arrays where data is stored sequentially in memory. Instead, each element contains address of the next element. It is a data structure consisting of a collection of nodes linked together.

Each node contains: data, and a reference to the next node in the sequence.

**Advantages**
Insertion and deletion of a node in a list is O(1), given its location, whereas in array, following elements have to be shifted

**Disadvantages**
Access time is linear O(n), directly accessing elements by its position in the list is not possible. You have to traverse from a start.

## Learning resources

- Readings
    - [What's a Linked List, Anyway? [Part 1]](https://medium.com/basecs/whats-a-linked-list-anyway-part-1-d8b7e6508b9d), basecs
    - [What's a Linked List, Anyway? [Part 2]](https://medium.com/basecs/whats-a-linked-list-anyway-part-2-131d96f71996), basecs
- Videos
    - [Singly-linked lists](https://www.coursera.org/lecture/data-structures/singly-linked-lists-kHhgK), University of California San Diego
    - [Doubly linked lists](https://www.coursera.org/lecture/data-structures/doubly-linked-lists-jpGKD), University of California San Diego

## Types of linked lists
**Singly Linked List**
Each node points to the next node and the last node points to `null`

**Doubly Linked List**
Each node has 2 pointers, `next` and `prev` to point to next and previous nodes.

**Circular Linked List**
A singly linked list where last node points back to first node. There is a circular doubly linked list variant where `prev` of first pointer points to last node and `next` pointer of  last node points to first node.

## Implementations
Out of C++, Java, python, and javascript, only Java provides a linked list implementation

## Time complexity
|Operation|Big-O|Note|
|---|---|---|
|Access|O(n)||
|Search|O(n)||
|Insert|O(1)|Assumes you have traversed to the insertion position|
|Remove|O(1)|Assumes you have traversed to the node to be removed|

## Common routines
Be familiar with the following routines because linked list questions make use of one or more of these routines in the solution:
- Counting the number of nodes in the linked list
- Reverse a linked list in-place
- Finding the middle node of the linked list using 2 pointers (fast/slow)
- Merging 2 linked lists together

## Corner cases
- Empty linked list (head is `null`)
- Single node
- 2 nodes
- Linked List has a cycle. Clarify with interviewer if there can be cycles in the list.

## Techniques
#### Sentinel/Dummy nodes
Adding a dummy node to head/tail might help to handle many edge cases where operations have to be performed at the head or tail. Presence of dummy nodes essentially ensures operations will never be done on head or tail thereby removing a lot of headache with writing conditional checks to deal with null pointers. Be sure to remove them at end of operation

#### Two pointers
Two pointer approaches are common with linked lists. 
- Getting the kth from last node - have 2 pointers, where 1 ptr is k nodes ahead of  the other. When this node reaches the end, the other node is k nodes behind
- Detecting cycles - have 2 pointers, fast and slow, where fast increments twice as much as slow. If they ever meet, this is a cycle
- Getting the middle node - have 2 pointers, fast and slow, when fast reaches the end, slow is in middle

#### Using space
Many linked list problems can be solved by creating a new linked list and adding nodes to this new one. However, this takes up extra space. Typically interviewer will ask that you modify the linked list in-place

#### Elegant modification operations
Linked list's non-sequential nature of memory allows for efficient modification of its contents. Unlike arrays where you can only modify the value at a position. You can modify `next` pointer and `value`
Here are some operations and how they can be achieved easily:
- Truncate a list - Set the `next` pointer to `null` for the node
- Swapping values of nodes - Just like arrays, just swap the `value` of 2 nodes
- Combining two lists - attach the head of the second list to the tail of the first list

## Notes:

**Reverse linked list**
```python
def reverseList(self, head: Optional[ListNode]) -> Optional[ListNode]:
	prev = None
	while head:
		tmp = head.next
		head.next = prev
		prev = head
		head = tmp
	return prev
```

**Find cycle in linked list**
```python
def hasCycle(self, head: Optional[ListNode]) -> bool:
	slow, fast = head, head
	while fast and fast.next:
		slow = slow.next
		fast = fast.next.next
		if slow == fast:
			return True
	return False
```
## Essential questions

_These are essential questions to practice if you're studying for this topic._

- [Reverse a Linked List](https://leetcode.com/problems/reverse-linked-list/)
- [Detect Cycle in a Linked List](https://leetcode.com/problems/linked-list-cycle/)

## Recommended practice questions

_These are recommended questions to practice after you have studied for the topic and have practiced the essential questions._

- [Merge Two Sorted Lists](https://leetcode.com/problems/merge-two-sorted-lists/)
- [Merge K Sorted Lists](https://leetcode.com/problems/merge-k-sorted-lists/)
- [Remove Nth Node From End Of List](https://leetcode.com/problems/remove-nth-node-from-end-of-list/)
- [Reorder List](https://leetcode.com/problems/reorder-list/)